README.md, before:

# Introduction to RStudio

The goal of these materials is to demonstrate a few of the many great features in RStudio:
- [git version control](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/200532077-Version-Control-with-Git-and-SVN)
- creating [documents (including docx)](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-9.html) and [slideshows (including pptx)](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-11.html)
- [data viewer (can read in xslx)](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/205175388-Using-the-Data-Viewer)


to make HTML slidedecks that can be put on the web, as well as PDF and powerpoint slides.

Instructions for how to turn [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) (`.md`), [R Markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-1.html) (`.Rmd`), and [Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user/notebook.html) (`.ipynb`) files into slides are detailed below.

One major advantage of HTML slidedecks is that you can host them on GitHub for free and share a url, instead of resorting to email or transferring files using USB drives.

Instead of using Powerpoint, Keynote, or Google Slides, I recommend you try to generate slides programmatically using the steps below.

Speaking of Powerpoint, I suggest that you avoid the horrors of Microsoft Office entirely.
- Instead of using Microsoft Word & Powerpoint and the doc(x) & ppt(x) formats, write documents and [slideshows](https://marskar.github.io/slides/) in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) format and then converted into the desired output format using one of the three options below:
    1. [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) or [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc) (recommended for users of the [Python programming language](https://www.python.org/) and those comfortable using the [command line](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface))
    2. [RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) or the [rmarkdown R package](https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown) (recommended for users of the [R programming language](https://www.r-project.org/))
    3. [JupyterLab](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) (or the classic [Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/starting.html))
- Instead of using Microsoft Excel and the xls(x) format, save tabular data as comma-separated value (csv) files. [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/), [RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) and [JupyterLab](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) all have csv viewers. These csv viewers are better options for looking at data than Excel, because they do not have the ability to edit or auto-format your raw data. [Tables that are meant to be displayed in documents](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#tables) can also be written in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) format instead of in Excel.

## Create HTML slides from markdown (md) using [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) or [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc)

The easiest way to create a slideshow is to write a simple markdown file, like `habits.md`, and use [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) to convert it to one of the possible HTML formats.

There are many ways to [install Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/installing.html), but I recommend to use [Anaconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#anaconda-glossary) or [Miniconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#miniconda-glossary). The [Anaconda installer](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/) is hundreds of MB in size because the Anaconda Python distribution includes hundreds of Python packages plus the Anaconda Navigator program. The [Miniconda installer](https://conda.io/miniconda.html) is more than ten times smaller and includes only Python and conda.

Once you have [Anaconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#anaconda-glossary) or [Miniconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#miniconda-glossary) installed, you can install [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) using this command-line command `conda install -yc conda-forge pandoc` and then run the one of the options below:

```
pandoc -t dzslides --self-contained -s habits.md -o pandoc/dzslides-pandoc.html
pandoc -t slidy --self-contained -s habits.md -o pandoc/slidy-pandoc.html
```

Instead of using [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) in the terminal as described above, you can also install [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc) and convert [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) to almost any format in your Python environment (e.g. in [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/))!

- Pro-tip 1: You can write [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) in [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/)! Press Ctrl/Cmd+N, then Enter, type out the name of the [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) file (must end in `.md`) you want to create, and press Enter again. You get [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) syntax highlighting and a live preview of your rendered [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/)!
- Pro-tip 2: If you create a new Python scratch file in [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/) (Press Ctrl/Cmd+Shift+N, then Enter) and change the extension from `.py` to `.md`, PyCharm will continue to treat the file like a Python script giving you the ability to run code in your [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) document! As soon as you take the file out of the Scratches folder, [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/) will treat it like a [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) file again! In short, [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/) will auto-detect the file type based on its extension, but this does not apply to scratch files!
- Pro-tip 3: To get automatic python syntax highlighting in your [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) documents on [GitHub](https://github.com/) and in [slideshows](https://marskar.github.io/slides/) created from [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) files, put three backticks (\`) followed by the word "python" above your code and then a new line below your code put another three backticks (\`). This is called a [code block](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#fenced-code-blocks) in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/).

### Examples of HTML slides created using [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) or [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc):

- [dzslides](/slides/pandoc/dzslides-pandoc.html)
- [slidy](/slides/pandoc/slidy-pandoc.html)

## Knit slides from md or Rmd to HTML in [RStudio](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-11.html) or from the command-line

First, you will need to install R. Again, I recommend installing [Anaconda or Miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/) and then running `conda install -yc r r-essentials`.

Then, write you can run one of the commands below to make the html slideshow.
```
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('habits.md', 'ioslides_presentation', 'r/ioslides-r.html')"
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('habits.md', 'slidy_presentation', 'r/slidy-r.html')"
```

You can also install RStudio by running `conda install -yc r rstudio`, open up a markdown file in RStudio, add a YAML header that specifies the `output_format` as in `habits.Rmd`, save the file and then click Preview/Knit or Press Ctrl/Cmd + Shift + K.

For revealjs and xaringan slides, you must first run `install.packages('revealjs')` and `install.packages('xaringan')` in RStudio before you can Knit (Ctrl/Cmd + Shift + K).

**You only need to install the packages once!**

You can also run install the packages and render slides from the command-line as below:

```
Rscript -e "install.packages('revealjs', repos='http://cran.us.r-project.org')"
Rscript -e "install.packages('xaringan', repos='http://cran.us.r-project.org')"
```

```
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('revealjs.Rmd', output_file = 'r/revealjs-r.html')"
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('xaringan.Rmd', output_file = 'r/xaringan.html')"
```

### Examples of HTML slides created using [RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) or the [rmarkdown R package](https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown):
- [ioslides](/slides/r/ioslides-r.html)
- [slidy](/slides/r/slidy-r.html)
- [revealjs](/slides/r/revealjs-r.html)
- [xaringan](/slides/r/xaringan.html)

## Create HTML slides from ipynb using [nbconvert](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) from the command-line

You can also create slides from a Jupyter Notebook using `jupyter nbconvert`.

If you have [Anaconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#anaconda-glossary) installed, you should already be able to run `jupyter nbconvert`, but if you are using [Miniconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#miniconda-glossary) you will need to install `nbconvert` by running `conda install -yc conda-forge jupyter nbconvert`.

```
url="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/reveal.js/3.5.0"
jupyter nbconvert revealjs.ipynb --to slides --reveal-prefix=$url
```

### An example with instructions for creating slides in JupyterLab:
 - [revealjs](/slides/revealjs.slides.html)

Exporting slides from JupyterLab does not work (great) right now.
It requires some [additional setup](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/issues/4067).
I would not recommend trying it until the next version of `jupyter nbconvert` comes out.

Luckily, there are other ways to make slides from a Jupyter Notebook.

1. The easiest way is to use [nbviewer](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/), so that you can switch between [notebook](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/marskar/biof309_spring2018/blob/master/slides.ipynb) and [slide view](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/format/slides/github/marskar/biof309_spring2018/blob/master/slides.ipynb).
2. Another approach is to use [binder for interactive notebooks/slideshows](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/mgeier/jupyter-presentation/master?filepath=jupyter-presentation.ipynb).

These two options are not the same as [creating an html slideshow from a jupyter notebook and hosting it on your website](https://marskar.github.io/jupyter-notebook-slides), but they get the job done.

Commit message:

add binder buttons to README

README.md, after:

# Introduction to RStudio

The goal of these materials is to demonstrate a few of the many great features in RStudio:
- [git version control](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/200532077-Version-Control-with-Git-and-SVN)
- creating [documents (including docx)](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-9.html) and [slideshows (including pptx)](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-11.html)
- [data viewer (can read in xslx)](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/205175388-Using-the-Data-Viewer)

You can interact with the materials by clicking on of the links below.

RStudio: [![Binder](http://mybinder.org/badge.svg)](http://beta.mybinder.org/v2/gh/binder-examples/r/master?urlpath=rstudio)

Jupyter+R: [![Binder](http://mybinder.org/badge.svg)](http://beta.mybinder.org/v2/gh/binder-examples/r/master?filepath=index.ipynb)

RShiny: [![Binder](http://mybinder.org/badge.svg)](http://beta.mybinder.org/v2/gh/binder-examples/r/master?urlpath=shiny/bus-dashboard/)


to make HTML slidedecks that can be put on the web, as well as PDF and powerpoint slides.

Instructions for how to turn [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) (`.md`), [R Markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-1.html) (`.Rmd`), and [Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user/notebook.html) (`.ipynb`) files into slides are detailed below.

One major advantage of HTML slidedecks is that you can host them on GitHub for free and share a url, instead of resorting to email or transferring files using USB drives.

Instead of using Powerpoint, Keynote, or Google Slides, I recommend you try to generate slides programmatically using the steps below.

Speaking of Powerpoint, I suggest that you avoid the horrors of Microsoft Office entirely.
- Instead of using Microsoft Word & Powerpoint and the doc(x) & ppt(x) formats, write documents and [slideshows](https://marskar.github.io/slides/) in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) format and then converted into the desired output format using one of the three options below:
    1. [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) or [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc) (recommended for users of the [Python programming language](https://www.python.org/) and those comfortable using the [command line](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface))
    2. [RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) or the [rmarkdown R package](https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown) (recommended for users of the [R programming language](https://www.r-project.org/))
    3. [JupyterLab](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) (or the classic [Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/starting.html))
- Instead of using Microsoft Excel and the xls(x) format, save tabular data as comma-separated value (csv) files. [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/), [RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) and [JupyterLab](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) all have csv viewers. These csv viewers are better options for looking at data than Excel, because they do not have the ability to edit or auto-format your raw data. [Tables that are meant to be displayed in documents](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#tables) can also be written in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) format instead of in Excel.

## Create HTML slides from markdown (md) using [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) or [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc)

The easiest way to create a slideshow is to write a simple markdown file, like `habits.md`, and use [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) to convert it to one of the possible HTML formats.

There are many ways to [install Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/installing.html), but I recommend to use [Anaconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#anaconda-glossary) or [Miniconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#miniconda-glossary). The [Anaconda installer](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/) is hundreds of MB in size because the Anaconda Python distribution includes hundreds of Python packages plus the Anaconda Navigator program. The [Miniconda installer](https://conda.io/miniconda.html) is more than ten times smaller and includes only Python and conda.

Once you have [Anaconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#anaconda-glossary) or [Miniconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#miniconda-glossary) installed, you can install [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) using this command-line command `conda install -yc conda-forge pandoc` and then run the one of the options below:

```
pandoc -t dzslides --self-contained -s habits.md -o pandoc/dzslides-pandoc.html
pandoc -t slidy --self-contained -s habits.md -o pandoc/slidy-pandoc.html
```

Instead of using [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) in the terminal as described above, you can also install [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc) and convert [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) to almost any format in your Python environment (e.g. in [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/))!

- Pro-tip 1: You can write [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) in [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/)! Press Ctrl/Cmd+N, then Enter, type out the name of the [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) file (must end in `.md`) you want to create, and press Enter again. You get [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) syntax highlighting and a live preview of your rendered [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/)!
- Pro-tip 2: If you create a new Python scratch file in [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/) (Press Ctrl/Cmd+Shift+N, then Enter) and change the extension from `.py` to `.md`, PyCharm will continue to treat the file like a Python script giving you the ability to run code in your [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) document! As soon as you take the file out of the Scratches folder, [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/) will treat it like a [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) file again! In short, [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/) will auto-detect the file type based on its extension, but this does not apply to scratch files!
- Pro-tip 3: To get automatic python syntax highlighting in your [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) documents on [GitHub](https://github.com/) and in [slideshows](https://marskar.github.io/slides/) created from [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) files, put three backticks (\`) followed by the word "python" above your code and then a new line below your code put another three backticks (\`). This is called a [code block](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#fenced-code-blocks) in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/).

### Examples of HTML slides created using [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#producing-slide-shows-with-pandoc) or [Pypandoc](https://github.com/bebraw/pypandoc):

- [dzslides](/slides/pandoc/dzslides-pandoc.html)
- [slidy](/slides/pandoc/slidy-pandoc.html)

## Knit slides from md or Rmd to HTML in [RStudio](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-11.html) or from the command-line

First, you will need to install R. Again, I recommend installing [Anaconda or Miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/) and then running `conda install -yc r r-essentials`.

Then, write you can run one of the commands below to make the html slideshow.
```
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('habits.md', 'ioslides_presentation', 'r/ioslides-r.html')"
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('habits.md', 'slidy_presentation', 'r/slidy-r.html')"
```

You can also install RStudio by running `conda install -yc r rstudio`, open up a markdown file in RStudio, add a YAML header that specifies the `output_format` as in `habits.Rmd`, save the file and then click Preview/Knit or Press Ctrl/Cmd + Shift + K.

For revealjs and xaringan slides, you must first run `install.packages('revealjs')` and `install.packages('xaringan')` in RStudio before you can Knit (Ctrl/Cmd + Shift + K).

**You only need to install the packages once!**

You can also run install the packages and render slides from the command-line as below:

```
Rscript -e "install.packages('revealjs', repos='http://cran.us.r-project.org')"
Rscript -e "install.packages('xaringan', repos='http://cran.us.r-project.org')"
```

```
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('revealjs.Rmd', output_file = 'r/revealjs-r.html')"
Rscript -e "rmarkdown::render('xaringan.Rmd', output_file = 'r/xaringan.html')"
```

### Examples of HTML slides created using [RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) or the [rmarkdown R package](https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown):
- [ioslides](/slides/r/ioslides-r.html)
- [slidy](/slides/r/slidy-r.html)
- [revealjs](/slides/r/revealjs-r.html)
- [xaringan](/slides/r/xaringan.html)

## Create HTML slides from ipynb using [nbconvert](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) from the command-line

You can also create slides from a Jupyter Notebook using `jupyter nbconvert`.

If you have [Anaconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#anaconda-glossary) installed, you should already be able to run `jupyter nbconvert`, but if you are using [Miniconda](https://conda.io/docs/glossary.html#miniconda-glossary) you will need to install `nbconvert` by running `conda install -yc conda-forge jupyter nbconvert`.

```
url="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/reveal.js/3.5.0"
jupyter nbconvert revealjs.ipynb --to slides --reveal-prefix=$url
```

### An example with instructions for creating slides in JupyterLab:
 - [revealjs](/slides/revealjs.slides.html)

Exporting slides from JupyterLab does not work (great) right now.
It requires some [additional setup](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/issues/4067).
I would not recommend trying it until the next version of `jupyter nbconvert` comes out.

Luckily, there are other ways to make slides from a Jupyter Notebook.

1. The easiest way is to use [nbviewer](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/), so that you can switch between [notebook](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/marskar/biof309_spring2018/blob/master/slides.ipynb) and [slide view](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/format/slides/github/marskar/biof309_spring2018/blob/master/slides.ipynb).
2. Another approach is to use [binder for interactive notebooks/slideshows](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/mgeier/jupyter-presentation/master?filepath=jupyter-presentation.ipynb).

These two options are not the same as [creating an html slideshow from a jupyter notebook and hosting it on your website](https://marskar.github.io/jupyter-notebook-slides), but they get the job done.
